---
layout: post
title: "Romans 10 and Infant Salvation"
date: 2022-03-01 19:30:00 +0300
tags: [baptism]
published: false
---

> For with the heart one believes and is justified, and with the mouth one confesses and is saved.  
> Romans 10:10 (ESV) 

When a believer from a baptistic background is presented with the covenant theology of the sixteenth
century and desires to embrace it, the chief stumbling block is, unmistakeably, the question of
infant baptism. If the paedobaptistic position is the Biblical one, as I believe it to be, the
reason for this is that baptists typically are so convinced of their position that they have never
seriously considered, and therefore never properly understood, the argumentation from the other
party.

This is not a tendency unique to baptists, but to fallen humanity in general. When we think
ourselves to have an open-and-shut case for something, it is extremely difficult to open our ears
and to listen to those coming from a different direction.
The Reformers, by and large, though we believe them to be correct in their reasoning, were sadly
unable to restrain themselves for persecuting believers who did not come to share in their views on
baptism, treating the issue as so plain and so without difficulty that _anyone whatever_ who
hesitated on the matter after hearing their arguments was acting in bad faith. Calvin speaks
(apparently of all baptists) as "hardening themselves against the truth"[^dure] and later calls them
"wild beasts"[^furiosa] who cease not to assail the holy ordinance of God. And he is the tip of the
iceberg in this case.

In taking up the question of infant salvation and baptism, we must remember the warning
of the apostle that knowledge puffs up, but love builds up (1 Cor. 8:1).

My goal in writing this brief article is not to make an open-and-shut case for paedobaptism. I
instead intend to show one major area where I think baptists go astray in interpreting Scripture,
and to plead with them to see that the approach they take cannot be applied consistently. In doing
so I hope to break through to baptists and help them see that the answer to this question is not so
obvious as they regarded it to be.

## Does Romans 10 proclaim damnation upon the mute?

If the question is stated so boldly, I am certain that most baptists will be inclined to respond,
_No_, quite immediately. However, if one follows the pattern in which they reason, it is difficult
to escape the conclusion that this is indeed what they believe it to teach.

They argue that infants cannot be baptised because they cannot confess that Jesus is Lord, and this,
they claim, is the only Scriptural basis upon which one can be baptised. If this thought is followed
out consistently, it follows that anyone who cannot speak _with the mouth_ (as Paul insists) cannot
be saved.

At this stage in my argument, I am certain that most baptists would charge me with misrepresenting
their position. "Surely," they say, "you cannot think us to be so wooden and unskilled in our
interpretation of Scripture. Paul is speaking about the _ordinary_ case, in which people are able to
speak, rather than the _extraordinary_ case of the mute who lack this capacity." They would freely
admit that a man may be mute and a Christian, for he can confess in writing and by communicating
through all the means available to him that he believes in Christ.

It is to such baptists that I address myself in asking, _What is your exegetical warrant for reading
Paul's words with such flexibility?_ What intra-textual evidence do you have that a restriction to
the ordinary case was in Paul's mind? How do you discern when we are to make such restrictions in
our understanding of the applicability of a statement in Scripture?

Presumably, their answer to this question is that of the Westminster divines: "the infallible rule
of interpretation of Scripture is the Scripture itself" (WCF I.9). When we set Paul's statement
within the larger context of Scripture, it is palpably ridiculous to raise the question as to
whether the mute can be saved. Isaiah prophesied of Christ's kingdom,

> Then shall the lame man leap like a deer, and the tongue of the mute sing for joy.  
> (Isaiah 35:6a)

This was surely fulfilled with Christ's coming:

> And they were astonished beyond measure, saying, "He has done all things well. He even makes the
> deaf hear and the mute speak."  
> Mark 7:37

With this answer and reasoning I am in total agreement, but it leads me to pose the another central
question.

## Does Romans 10 proclaim damnation upon infants?

Baptists would argue that since infants cannot believe with the heart and confess with the mouth,
Paul's statements in Romans 10:8–10 exclude them from the hope of salvation (until they come to
maturity). But paedobaptists respond, "Paul is speaking about the _ordinary_ case, namely, that of
the adult or speaking child, rather than the extraordinary case of those who never mature past
infancy".

At this stage, baptists cry foul and ask us, _What is your exegetical warrant for reading the
apostle's words with such flexibility?_ Our response, just like theirs above, is recourse to the
rest of Scripture. 

The Old Testament, from cover to cover, proclaims that the steadfast love of God proceeds from one
generation to another, nay, "to a thousand generations" (Deut. 7:9), nay again, it is "from
everlasting to everlasting" (Psalm 103:17). There is no covenant in the Bible that does not have a
family at its centre: 

- Noahic: "Behold, I establish my covenant **with you and your offspring after you**" (Genesis 9:9)

- Abrahamic: "I will establish my covenant **between me and you and your offspring after you**
  throughout their generations for an everlasting covenant, to be God to you and to your offspring
  after you." (Genesis 17:7)

- Mosaic: "The secret things belong to the LORD our God, but the things that are revealed belong
  **to us and to our children forever**, that we may do all the words of this law." (Deut. 29:29)

- Davidic: "For does not **my house** stand so with God? For he has made with me an everlasting
  covenant, ordered in all things and secure." (2 Samuel 23:5a)

- New: "Behold, the days are coming, declares the LORD, when I will make a new covenant **with the
  house of Israel and the house of Judah**." (Jeremiah 31:31)

Moreover, with regard to the case of infants, Jesus quotes Psalm 8 by saying that "Out of the mouth
of infants and nursing babies [God] has prepared praise". He takes children and _even infants_ into
his arms and blesses them, laying his hands on them (Matt 19:13–15, Mark 10:13–15, Luke 18:15-17).

This evidence, much more of which can easily be produced, militates against the conclusion that
Paul's statement should be interpreted to exclude the possibility of salvation for infants and for
those with mental impairments. His point in the passage is to show that righteousness is by faith,
that "the word is near", rather than to tacitly imply that all infants and all with severe mental
impairments (which prevent them from speaking) are beyond the hope of salvation.

## Conclusion

The connection between the two sections of my argument should now be clear. The baptist who affirms
the salvation of the mute is consistent with Paul's strong statements in Romans 10 is being
inconsistent when he maintains that the salvation of infants is impossible because of this text (or
1 Peter 1:23).

To strengthen the argument we can easily appeal to John the Baptist, who was saved in his infancy,
as testimony to the fact that our reasoning in this article is correct. If Paul's words in Romans 10
preclude the possibility of infant salvation, they do this without any exception, and this would
lead to a contradiction with Luke's witness. Since Scripture is consistent, there is no
contradiction, and therefore Paul is not excluding the possibility of infant salvation. It makes not
one whit of _logical_ difference whether it is admitted that God saved one or ten million infants,
in either case faith in the consistency of the Scripture requires us to admit that Paul's words
cannot be made into a wall of separation between the young and the old.

God makes the mute, both young and old, speak and sing for joy.

### Footnotes
[^dure]: _qui adversus veritatem obduruerunt_, "who hardened themselves against the truth", _Institutes_ IV.16.7

[^furiosa]: "_furiosae quaedam belluae_", _ibid_ IV.16.10
