---
layout: post
title: "All Things Lawful"
date: 2018-05-18 04:00:00 +0200
tags: [law, freedom]
published: false
---

> "All things are lawful for me", but not all things are helpful. "All things are lawful for me",
> but I will not be enslaved by anything. "Food is meant for the stomach and the stomach for
> food"---and God will destroy both one and the other. The body is not meant for sexual immorality,
> but for the Lord, and the Lord for the body. And God raised the Lord and will also raise us up
> by his power.  
> 1 Corinthians 6:12-14

Here is a sure principle: To the degree that a word in Scripture is vital, it will be corrupted by
false teaching, and conversely, to the degree that a word has been adopted and embraced by the
ignorant and deceitful, to that exact degree is it an essential teaching of the Christian religion.

I will give two examples, one obvious and one less so. Do you think it's mere coincidence that
leads the false teachers of our day to abuse Philippians 4:13? Paul is teaching the Church the
secret to endurance in all circumstances, the secret to 'facing plenty and hunger, abundance and
need.' The very verses that were written to guide saints through seasons of want have been co-opted
to justify all kinds of irreverent demands and unrealistic expectations of the will of God. They
have been used to disguise infidelity as faith, to label impatience 'hope'.

A less-known but equally-important example can be found in Hebrews 6. Opponents of the precious
doctrine of the saints' perseverance commonly attempt to pervert v.4-8 to the defense of their
perspective. This is their shout: if read the Apostle's words "without any wresting" (as Owen says)
then it is manifest that believers can lose their salvation. I do not deny that to them it must seem
so, as the Scriptures are frequently "hard to understand". Instead, I affirm with apostolic
authority that it is these things which "the ignorant and unstable twist to their own destruction"
(2 Peter 3:16). Nonetheless, my only goal here is to show that this text is being used for its
_exact_ opposite purpose, which anyone who reads v.9-12 will immediately see. So a text which was
given in order that Christians might "have the full assurance of hope until the end", because the
Spirit is "sure of better things---things that belong to salvation" for them, is used to make them
doubt their eternal security. We who know the truth simply marvel at the accuracy of our Saviour's
words: "when he lies, he speaks out of his own character".
(Lest I leave unlocked this door to hell, having broached this topic, I challenge
anyone attempting to advance the arguments with Hebrews 10:26-29 read v.32-39 of the same chapter.)

I would go as far as to venture, with some possible exclusions, that it would be easy to show how
misunderstood texts are always twisted in this way. And sadly, so it is with Paul's warning to the
Corinthian church above. I hope, O Reader, that after a brief journey through this text, we will
both be innocent of the perversion I have just lamented, so join me in praying for the illumination
we will need:

_Many have lied about You, Jesus. And we with unclean lips dwell among such people. Grant us the
grace, even as You promised to guide us by the Spirit of truth, to be among the few who are able and
content to hear and declare Your truth, which has indeed set us free. Amen._


