---
layout: post
title: "Thy Mercy is in the Heavens, thy Judgements are a Great Deep"
date: 2019-02-17 08:00:00 +0300
tags: [mystery, Calvinism, Arminianism, mercy]
published: false
---

The perennial debate on the nature and extent of the grace, mercy, and love of Jehovah, which he
manifests to the fallen sons of Adam, is a controversy of the most supreme significance. It is so
because as the inspired apostle writes, God is love (1 John 4:8). John elsewhere records this
tremendous statement from the lips of our Lord:

> This is eternal life, that they know you, the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom you have
> sent.  
> John 17:3

We may fittingly conclude, therefore, that eternity hangs on the definition our souls attach to the
divine love.
And so it is with trembling lips that we must approach this debate, ridding ourselves of any party
spirits, for we are seeking to penetrate into the heart of the truth revealed in Sacred Scripture as
it relates to the foundations of our salvation. This salvation finding its origin in the purpose and
character of God, we dare not engage ourselves in speculation regarding the secret things of God,
instead, we must be content with a saving understanding of the things revealed, which belong to us
and to our children forever.

> The supreme judge by which all controversies of religion are to be determined, and all decrees of
> councils, opinions of ancient writers, doctrines of men, and private spirits, are to be examined,
> and in whose sentence we are to rest, can be no other but the Holy Spirit speaking in the
> Scripture.  
> (Westminster Confession of Faith, I.10)

## Preliminaries
Before beginning, I want to defend my use of certain labels (which will shortly be introduced) as
well as make a disclaimer with which I hope to preserve the unity of the Spirit in the bond of
peace.

I make free usage of the terms _Calvinism_ and _Arminianism_. The reader will readily perceive that
I myself am a Calvinist. But, says someone, did not our Lord instruct us to "call no man father on
earth"? To this I respond that this same Jesus required of his disciples obedience to the teaching
that proceeded from "the seat of Moses" (Matthew 23:2-3).  Similarly, we are instructed to be
"imitators of those who through faith and patience inherit the promises" and (of those who lead us)
to "consider the outcome of their way of life" (Hebrews 6:12, 13:7).  All this goes to show that the
Lord was not requiring that his disciples refrain from identifying themselves with specific saints
who walked the narrow road before them, but rather, he was rejecting the arrogant
self-aggrandisement and hero worship of the Pharisees and their followers.

Yet I acknowledge the danger (most disgracefully ignored by the Roman church) in forming theological
camps around the names of the dead---even though they be the dead in Christ. For this reason let me
clarify what I mean. When engaged in a debate about the meaning Scripture, it is inappropriate to
beg the question by assuming your opponents' position is erroneous from the beginning. For this
reason, it is simply bad manners to declare that you have no position in this matter save the
Biblical perspective, as this is the very issue being debated: _what does the Bible say?_

When I say that I am a Calvinist, it is simply a shorthand form of declaring my conviction that
teachings of John Calvin on the matter at hand are in submission and concord with what is given in
Scripture: namely, his view that the ultimate destinies of the saints and the damned were determined
by God in eternity past according to his mere sovereign pleasure. When I speak of Arminians, I am
referring to those who with Jacobus Arminius disagree with Calvin's views, holding instead the
Scripture to teach that God, according to his wisdom and power, has chosen to make his elective
decree ultimately contingent on the decisions of his free creatures.

Secondly, let me proclaim now and most loudly, lest it be obscured by what has preceded or follows,
that I believe this debate to be intramural: a disagreement within the household of faith. I regard
faithful Arminians as my brothers in the Lord. That it is a severe controversy must be granted, this
is no trivial issue. The wrong view---whichever it is, is profoundly blasphemous and urgently to be
repented of. Either the King of glory has been presented in a manner that deprives him of a measure
of his sovereignty, his grace been presumed upon, and his justice impugned; or on the other hand,
the mercy and love of the God _who is love_ have been confined within rigid limits in a manner that
greatly distorts his character and diminishes his grace.

So it is arrogance of an intolerable kind that leads men to say things such as, "let us not disturb
the unity of the Body by debating these contentious matters". It is the men who talk like this whose
status in the Kingdom I doubt most seriously! Is the Holy Spirit to be corrected?  Does he not speak
(and copiously) regarding these matters in the Bible?  If God did not want us to discuss, to
wrestle, to struggle with this issue (or any other addressed in Scripture) it would have remained
secret:

> The secret things belong to the LORD our God, but the things that are revealed belong to us and to
> our children forever, that we may do all the words of this law.  
> Deuteronomy 29:29


Moreover, if you can watch anyone---let alone your brothers and sisters in the Lord---labour under
damaging and corrupt views about the character of God without feeling compelled to rebuke them in
love, to reason with them, to insist that they return to what is taught in Scripture, then you are
no lover of God or man, but a selfish and complacent lover of the praise of man.

All this notwithstanding, we have left the path of reason, we are no longer speaking truth in love,
we are denying the fundamental article of Protestant faith, when we proclaim that those who will
affirm with us that there is "one body and one Spirit, one Lord, one faith, one baptism, one God and
Father of all" are lost. The Calvinist who will not regard an Arminian as his brother, or
vice-versa, does greater violence to the Biblical character of God and his Christ than Arminianism
(or Calvinism) possibly could, because he has added conditions to the Gospel message.

Sinners are not justified when they change their theological views, although theological revolution
is certainly a necessary consequence. They are justified when they apprehend the Saviour presented
to them in the Gospel---whether through the types and shadows that predate his glorious first advent
and work, or through the wonderfully clear apostolic witness and reflections---I say, they are
justified when they believe in Christ, and God counts it to them as righteousness. To insist that
all the theological reformation must take place at the point of justification and adoption, or
before glory, is to make a vain attempt at closing the door opened by the one who "opens, and no one
will shut", and I for one refuse to accept any part in so hideous a transgression against the Good
Shepherd.

My goal today is not to argue directly for the truth of Calvinism. I leave that matter (at least for
the time being) to the legion of theologians who have demonstrated this to be the case (e.g.
consider reading [_Redemption: Accomplished and
Applied_](https://www.amazon.com/dp/080287309X/ref=cm_sw_em_r_mt_dp_U_oowACbQJF3DF8) by John
Murray). I hope instead  to show how Calvinism is perfectly consistent with a God who is merciful
and loving _to all_, and how the Arminian theory, aside from being self-contradictory, presents a
God who is no more merciful than the God of the Calvinists.

## Why Definitions Matter
_The reader with a short attention span is free to skip this section, as it does not deal directly
with the issue at hand._

There is no more to words than definitions, and no more to definitions than words. This is the
source of many of the problems that plague human communication. Too often it happens that the cause
of a quarrel is that one or both of the parties involved misunderstands the meaning of a key term.
Or worse, the term is correctly understood but different definitions are in play. Thank God for
dictionaries, which can sometimes resolve such controversies.

But what do we do when the controversy involves the definition of a _really_ simple word? Every
language has what are known as [_semantic primes_](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Semantic_primes),
concepts which cannot be expressed other than with reference to primitive terms whose meanings are
"understood". Try defining a word like _good_ or _big_, for example. These primes are the words in
terms of which more difficult words are usually explained, so that the task of providing a
definition for a prime is futile. The best that we can do is appeal to other commonly-understood
primitives, if they exist. This is one of the reasons we should find it so marvellous that babies
are able to learn language, because what they must understand these primes by a process of pure
intuition.
This problem is compounded when translating between languages because it often occurs that one
tongue has primitives not available in another. 

Now let us think about the difficulties a not-so-imaginary beginner might encounter with Bible. He
has never read Scripture seriously, but at many a wedding he hears a sermon preached on 1
Corinthians 13, in which is written "love does not envy or boast". Moreover, because modern
Christians are unhesitating in casting pearls before swine, our beginner is well familiar with the
apostle John's identity: "God is love". And he of course knows what some Christians are
thoughtlessly calling Jesus' summary of the Gospel: "Love God, love people." (I call this foolish
because this is actually a summary of the Law, see Matthew 22:37--40.)

Anyway, one day our beginner listens to some intellectual speak about the "manifold" contradictions
in the Bible. We all know, begins the enlightened sage, that the New Testament says that "God is
love", and "love does not envy". But in Exodus 20:5 we read,
"I the LORD your God am a jealous God."
Again, the Paul says that "love does not boast", and yet God says to Pharaoh,
> But for this purpose I have raised you up, to show you my power, so that my name may be proclaimed
> in all the earth.  
> Exodus 9:16

Think about that! (continues the intellectual) God hardened Pharaoh's heart so he could inflict
plagues on the entire Egyptian nation, even killing all the firstborn males---some of whom were
innocent babies!---all to demonstrate his power to the nations.

Now the only point I want to make is that these texts are actually not being quoted out of context.
Who can blame our ignorant beginner for seeing contradictions here? God can, because [there aren't
any](/2018/07/06/divine-truth). But modern Christians cannot, because with their careless use of
language they have made this confusion possible.

No one told our Biblically-illiterate man, when preaching on 1 Corinthians 13, that the love in view
is the spiritual gift given to believers, meant to characterise appropriate behaviour for brothers
and sisters in the Church. No one told him that though this love is best exemplified by the life and
death of the Saviour, it is distinctly _human_, it is horizontal. Still, no one told him that by
_envy_ Paul refers to the selfish desire for what is not yours (like a man coveting his neighbour's
wife), rather than the righteous desire for what is yours (like the feelings of jealousy experienced
by a man who finds that his wife has been unfaithful). Again, no one told him that when Paul says
_boast_ he is thinking of the exaltation of sinful human beings for which he censures the Corinthian
church throughout his letter:

> For when one says, "I follow Paul," and another, "I follow Apollos," are you not being merely
> human? What then is Apollos? What is Paul? Servants through whom you believed, as the Lord
> assigned to each. I planted, Apollos watered, but God gave the growth.  
> 1 Corinthians 3:4–6

He is certainly not against boasting in that which is truly glorious (1 Corinthians 1:31).
And it is this kind of boasting that God does in himself; should not the one to whom all honour is
due give it to himself?

But try arguing with this ignorant man who now considers himself enlightened. Tell him that the real
problem is he has no idea what is meant (either in the Old or New Testament) by the word _love_. "Oh
I get it!" (he might mock) "There's really no contradiction in the Bible, it's just that I don't
know what love is!"

Yet even if he were willing to listen we would run into a great difficulty. And this is that the
word _love_ is a semantic primitive. We can no more easily define love than we can goodness; much
more difficult then is it to define love as it is used in both Old and New Testaments, over a period
of one-and-a-half millennia, across forty different authors. On top of this, our English word _love_
is used to cover several different words in both Hebrew and Greek.

I fear I have wasted the reader's time with much of this section, but my goal in writing it is to
drive home the importance---and difficulty---of having the correct definitions in mind when arguing
about the meaning of Scripture.

## How God the Sovereign remains the Merciful God
One sad consequence of this trouble with definitions is many believers who are exposed to the
Reformed faith stumble over texts like this,

> The LORD is good to all, and his mercy is over all that he has made.  
> Psalm 145:9

We must listen to the honest Arminian objector: look at it! It's in the Bible, it's a word of praise
to God for his _universal_ mercy. And yet Paul writes,

> So then he has mercy on whomever he wills, and he hardens whomever he wills.  
> Romans 9:18

As well as,

> What if God, desiring to show his wrath and to make known his power, has endured with much patience
> vessels of wrath prepared for destruction, in order to make known the riches of his glory for
> vessels of mercy, which he has prepared beforehand for glory—even us whom he has called, not from
> the Jews only but also from the Gentiles?  
> Romans 9:22–24

How---if we interpret these passages with Calvin---is God merciful to the "vessels of wrath prepared
for destruction"? Should we not adjust our understanding of Paul to accommodate God's universal
mercy?

Out of love for the truth, questions like these are not to be disregarded in an off-handed manner.
The first thing we must do is give our view without any pretensions, and then ask our Arminian
brothers to hear us out. Here it is:

<p align="center" style="font-weight:bold;">
God is wonderfully merciful to all, but he is much more merciful to some, even the elect.
</p>

For this statement to be set in its appropriate place, we must focus on the meaning of the word
_mercy_.
I am satisfied with the standard definition here, provided that it is properly understood.

> He does not deal with us according to our sins, nor repay us according to our iniquities.  
> Psalm 103:10

It must be noted that this passage (Psalm 103) emphasises the love that God shows to his elect,
yet the verse above gives an accurate summation of mercy as it is used Biblically: mercy is the
withholding of punishment from one whose just desert it is.

Now let us consider the statement above. God is merciful to all because he does not cast sinners
into hell from the moment of their transgression. His threat to Adam was, "of the tree of the
knowledge of good and evil you shall not eat, for in the day that you eat of it you shall surely
die." (Genesis 2:17) Adam had no right to be promised a Redeemer, to be clothed in garments of skin.
God might have cast him into hell in that very instant (which would have been spiritual death).

The same might be said for all of Adam's offspring, who having fallen in their first parents are
conceived in sin and brought forth in iniquity (Psalm 51:5). Childbirth is the mercy of God, as the
mother of all the living recognised (cf. Genesis 4:1, 25). God does no injustice to sinners when he
takes their life, whether they be in the womb or wheelchair. He is simply taking back the life he
gave, a gift which has been scorned with sinful thoughts and attitudes from the moment of
conception:
> The LORD saw that the wickedness of man was great in the earth, and that every intention of the
> thoughts of his heart was only evil continually.  
> Genesis 6:5

> The wicked are estranged from the womb; they go astray from birth, speaking lies.  
> Psalm 58:3

What man dares deny this charge which comes at him from heaven? Do you not see the mercy of God to
fallen sinners?
> And when the LORD smelled the pleasing aroma, the LORD said in his heart, "I will never again
> curse the ground because of man, for the intention of man's heart is evil from his youth. Neither
> will I ever again strike down every living creature as I have done."  
> Genesis 8:21

If sin was not inherent in fallen humanity from the womb, why was the Lord supernaturally
conceived, rather than supernaturally born?

That he permits so many to be born, indeed, to live for decades, underneath the light of his sun,
surely this is staggering the mercy of the Almighty:
> For he makes his sun rise on the evil and on the good, and sends rain on the just and on the
> unjust.  
> Matthew 5:45b

This last verse, which comes from the mouth of our Lord, gives us an indication about the
distinction between the love and mercy God shows to "the just and the unjust", i.e. to all, and the
mercy he shows to his elect. Just before, Jesus says to his disciples, "Love your enemies...that you
may be sons of your Father who is in heaven." (Matthew 5:44--45) The point is that God shows mercy
(love in this passage) to the whole world of sinners by treating them _far_ better than they
deserve and by blessing them with innumerable gifts, and by showing them "the riches of his kindness
and forbearance and patience" despite their impenitence (Romans 2:4--5). But he is merciful to his
elect by becoming their Father, and making them his sons (cf. Ephesians 1:3-6, John 1:12).

## Yes, Some Things are Hard to Understand

But something is still perplexing the weaker brother (if I call him so without causing too much
offense), and we must seek to respond according to the wisdom that God has given: Fine, (says the
Arminian) I understand your definition of mercy, and it is internally consistent with your
theological system. But I reject it because I think it impoverishes the Biblical doctrine of the
mercy of God, the God who says of Israel,
> "All day long I have held out my hands to a disobedient and contrary people."  
> Romans 10:21b

> "O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, the city that kills the prophets and stones those who are sent to it! How
> often would I have gathered your children together as a hen gathers her brood under her wings, and
> you were not willing!"  
> Matthew 23:37

To this question, I have several answers, which I find rather satisfactory.
But first let me make an admission that might be helpful.

> And count the patience of our Lord as salvation, just as our beloved brother Paul also wrote to
> you according to the wisdom given him, as he does in all his letters when he speaks in them of
> these matters. There are some things in them that are hard to understand, which the ignorant and
> unstable twist to their own destruction, as they do the other Scriptures.  
> 2 Peter 3:15–16

I think that the subject of predestination is one of these things. It is certainly hard to
understand. So let me be clear in saying that I (and _almost_ every Calvinist I have heard of)
struggles here. These matters stretch the human mind well out of the region of its adequacy. Listen
to the greatest defenders of this doctrine the Lord has given his Church:

> Let it be our first principle that to desire any other knowledge of predestination than that which
> is expounded by the word of God, is no less infatuated than to walk where there is no path, or to
> seek light in darkness. Let us not be ashamed to be ignorant in a matter in which ignorance is
> learning. Rather let us willingly abstain from the search after knowledge, to which it is both
> foolish as well as perilous, and even fatal to aspire. If an unrestrained imagination urges us,
> our proper course is to oppose it with these words, "It is not good to eat much honey: so for men
> to search their own glory is not glory," (Proverbs 25:27). There is good reason to dread a
> presumption which can only plunge us headlong into ruin.  
> _Institutes_ III.21.2

> Let us not decline to submit our judgment to the boundless wisdom of God, so far as to confess its
> insufficiency to comprehend many of his secrets. Ignorance of things which we are not able, or
> which it is not lawful to know, is learning, while the desire to know them is a species of
> madness.  
> _Institutes_ III.23.8

> Who are ye, miserable men, that bring an accusation against God, and bring it because he does not
> adapt the greatness of his works to your meagre capacity? As if every thing must be perverse that
> is hidden from the flesh. The immensity of the divine judgments is known to you by clear
> experience.  You know that they are called "a great deep" (Psalm 36:6). Now, look at the
> narrowness of your own minds and say whether it can comprehend the decrees of God. Why then should
> you, by infatuated inquisitiveness, plunge yourselves into an abyss which reason itself tells you
> will prove your destruction? Why are you not deterred, in some degree at least, by what the Book
> of Job, as well as the Prophetical books declare concerning the incomprehensible wisdom and
> dreadful power of God? If your mind is troubled, decline not to embrace the counsel of Augustine,
> "You a man expect an answer from me: I also am a man. Wherefore, let us both listen to him who
> says, 'O man, who art thou?' Believing ignorance is better than presumptuous knowledge. Seek
> merits; you will find nought but punishment. O the height! Peter denies, a thief believes. O the
> height! Do you ask the reason? I will tremble at the height.  Reason you, I will wonder; dispute
> you, I will believe. I see the height; I cannot sound the depth. Paul found rest, because he found
> wonder. He calls the judgments of God 'unsearchable;' and have you come to search them? He says
> that his ways are 'past finding out,' and do you seek to find them out?"  
> _Institutes_ III.22.10

Content with these words, let me proceed to answer the objection that is raised above. My responses
will of necessity be incomplete, because God has not told us everything, neither is he under any
obligation to do so.
> "All day long I have held out my hands to a disobedient and contrary people."  
> Romans 10:21b

> "O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, the city that kills the prophets and stones those who are sent to it! How
> often would I have gathered your children together as a hen gathers her brood under her wings, and
> you were not willing!"  
> Matthew 23:37

You say to me that the God revealed in these texts is inconsistent with a God who (according to
Calvinists) elects _unconditionally_. Does it not make God disingenuous? What kind of love is this,
to predestine some people to eternal damnation, before they exist? What mercy---to hold out the
offer of salvation to people from whom you withhold the very grace that would lead them to accept
it? Is this not mockery rather than mercy?

Here is what I say. If you are struggling with these questions, I would have you know that this is
not the point at which Calvinists appeal to mystery. And to misplace this appeal is just as
dangerous as to conceal it. The mystery is this---that God is somehow capable of creating creatures
who are perfectly holy, but capable of sin. The mystery is that this fall from righteousness was
decreed by God in eternity past, yet in such a way that the creatures (men and angels) were truly
and utterly responsible for their actions. The mystery is that no moral or natural necessity was
laid on Adam to fall, and yet Adam would necessarily fall.
This mystery we cannot solve, and that we openly declare. Listen to the Psalmist:

> The LORD looks down from heaven; he sees all the children of man;   
> from where he sits enthroned he looks out on all the inhabitants of the earth,   
> he who fashions the hearts of them all and observes all their deeds.  
> Psalm 33:13–15

The same God who gives us hearts---who fashions them---who directs them (Proverbs 21:1)---is the one
who looks to see, to weigh, to reward. How then do the "twain meet"? We do not know. But let this
be admitted, if indeed the two are reconcilable, then the justice of God is unimpeached. His
character as being universally merciful---yet more merciful to some---however paradoxical, contains
no logical contradictions. There is mystery in the foundation, but no mystery in the building, only
the wonder of God's love to his elect, and the glory of his justice to those who have offended his
majesty. Read this verse again,

> What if God, desiring to show his wrath and to make known his power, has endured with much
> patience vessels of wrath prepared for destruction, in order to make known the riches of his glory
> for vessels of mercy, which he has prepared beforehand for glory—even us whom he has called, not
> from the Jews only but also from the Gentiles?  
> Romans 9:22–24

Again, if God by his creative power is capable of making truly free creatures whose actions are in
perfect accord with his eternal decrees---however mysterious this may be---then he is being truly
merciful to them when he delays his justice. It is no mockery to offer them the Gospel because the
offer is made in good faith---"him that cometh to me I will in no wise cast out." The door is really
open, and so are his arms. 

Stop!---you say---it _is_ mockery. God knows that they won't respond, so how can it be said that the
offer is made in good faith? By "good faith" I mean that God is not lying when he says, "everyone
who calls on the name of the Lord will be saved." Is this not the meaning of the words?

Moreover, the Arminian conception does not escape this same difficulty. God knows those who would
respond in faith---isn't this the definition of divine foreknowledge in Arminianism? And yet he
chooses to send his Gospel to billions who will reject it. Do you deny that this is an expression of
his mercy? Is this mere mockery?

But! But! But in Arminianism at least God does his best to save the lost. The Calvinist view paints
God as having every power to save the lost but deliberately not exercising it. To this I answer,
first of all, God sent no Gospel to the fallen angels. He made no attempt to save them:
> For if God did not spare angels when they sinned, but cast them into hell and committed them to
> chains of gloomy darkness to be kept until the judgment;  
> 2 Peter 2:4

> For surely it is not angels that he helps, but he helps the offspring of Abraham.  
> Hebrews 2:16

Incidentally, the last of these two texts _screams_ of the particular nature of God's grace, but I
digress.

Secondly, is the arm of the Arminian Jehovah shortened? Do you really believe that God could not
override the "real" (your words) freedom that he has granted to humans? Are they out of his hands?
Could he not "violate" their wills and "force" them to accept Christ?

I am sure (because I hold you to be a fellow believer) that your answer to those questions is an
emphatic, no. "Our God is in the heavens, he does all that he pleases." You believe that in order to
make possible true creaturely virtue, God has willed to leave his free creatures to their own
devices. He has given them liberty, this is his sovereign pleasure; let me quote one of my favourite
Arminian theologians:
> God sovereignly decreed that man should be free to exercise moral choice, and man from the
> beginning has fulfilled that decree by making his choice between good and evil. When he chooses to
> do evil, he does not thereby countervail the sovereign will of God but fulfils it, inasmuch as
> the eternal decree decided not which choice the man should make but that he should be free to make
> it. If in His absolute freedom God has willed to give man limited freedom, who is there to stay
> His hand or say, "What doest thou?" Man’s will is free because God is sovereign. A God less than
> sovereign could not bestow moral freedom upon His creatures. He would be afraid to do so.  
> A.W. Tozer, _Knowledge of the Holy_ ch.22

You see that both systems present God as being capable of saving (perhaps you would argue that a
"forcible" change in heart would not be salvation, but it would at least prevent the eternal
suffering) any given sinner if he so pleases. The Calvinist system insists that the _ultimate_
reason God chooses to save one and not the other is hidden in himself alone, for his own glory, and
owing not to any influence exerted upon him externally in which one sinner distinguishes himself
from another:
> God chose what is low and despised in the world, even things that are not, to bring to nothing
> things that are, so that no human being might boast in the presence of God. And because of him you
> are in Christ Jesus, who became to us wisdom from God, righteousness and sanctification and
> redemption, so that, as it is written, "Let the one who boasts, boast in the Lord."  
> 1 Corinthians 1:28–31

The Arminian system insists that God's chooses to save those who will accept his salvation, so that
it the _ultimate_ cause distinction between the saved and the lost is in the decisions of the two
groups.

But in both systems God created those who would be ultimately damned, knowing that for them there
would be no other outcome than damnation. He might have chosen not to create them. Moreover, he
might have chosen (by one means or another) to save them. And yet he did not.

What I am saying to my Arminian brothers is this: your system does not succeed in "defending" (a
most blasphemous exercise, I am sad to say) God. He remains the God who in his perfect holiness has
chosen to punish his enemies for all eternity. The only way out of this difficulty is to adopt the
heresies of universalism or annihilationism.

When you declare that the Calvinist system presents God as being unjust, you are really denying the
reality of human sin. You are saying that God is, however latently, in one way or another, obligated
to offer and procure salvation for sinners. You are denying that grace is _truly_ unmerited favour.

> So too at the present time there is a remnant, chosen by grace. But if it is by grace, it is no
> longer on the basis of works; otherwise grace would no longer be grace.  
> Romans 11:5–6

Think about it! Do you realise that if salvation is truly unmerited, God might never have sent his
Son into the world? Do you realise that he would have remained who he is, "slow to anger and
abounding in steadfast love"---yes---that God would still be love? Even if he had chosen to damn the
whole race? Do you not see that this is what happened to the angels---and that he did not pervert
justice?

> To deny a man justice in the presence of the Most High,  
> To subvert a man in his lawsuit, the Lord does not approve.  
> Lamentations 3:35–36

God is not perverter of justice. He is of purer eyes than to behold iniquity, and the heavens are
not pure in his sight. He sent his Son into the world, and crushed him under the weight of his holy
wrath against the sins of the world, that infinite, dreadful, immeasurable weight. God is not a
perverter of justice---this is the point of hell.

It is dreadful irony, a most definite fruit of human sinfulness, that men stumble over the justice
of God in the damnation of sinners. Because so far from being a perversion of justice, it is in
hell---as well as at Calvary---that the justice of God is most perfectly manifested. Hence the Great
White Throne. There is nothing sadistic about the punishment of sinners. They are simply given the
fruit of their deeds.

We (Calvinists) shudder with you at the pagan notion of fate, at the idea of a sheer absolute power
determining matters arbitrarily. This is not the God we worship. Look at the Cross, and mediate on
the Saviour's life, before you impugn the integrity of the Judge of all the earth. He can only do
right. He does all things well.

So then one final question remains (for both Calvinists and Arminians)---why did God choose to
create the reprobate in the first place? 
The Arminian answer is (as far as I can tell) something like, He did it because it was the cost of
populating heaven with real, free creatures. I hope I have shown how this is utterly
unsatisfactory---are you telling me that the Lord God Almighty was unable to create only those who
he foresaw would choose him? And show me one verse in Holy Scripture that supports so absurd an
idea.

The truth is that God wanted to show his justice as well as his mercy. Indeed, he meant to magnify
the glory of his mercy by means of a contrast, in which he shows that he was truly free in granting
salvation to the elect (Romans 9:22-23). We speak of God acting for the sake of his glory---we must
be careful, because his essential glory remains undisturbed from the foundation of the world. He is
in heaven, we are on earth. It is totally out of our reach, God is satisfied in himself and would
have remained so with or without us. He would have remained the God of perfect love even if he had
damned every last human soul, yet because he is the God of perfect love he chose to save a great
multitude that no one can number, from every nation, from all tribes and peoples and languages. God
acted to glorify himself---not in his own eyes, but in the eyes of the very creatures he chose to
save and damn.

Let us praise him for the inexpressible gift of his love, the incalculable price at which our
redemption was purchased, the Lamb of God. Let us commit our lives to him and humble ourselves,
acknowledging that though his judgements are a great deep, his righteousness is as the mountains
of God. Let us not seek to unravel the secret things which our Father in heaven has concealed, for
he has concealed them for our own good ("all things"---even mysteries---in Romans 8:28).

But let us not deny what is plainly and certainly revealed in the Holy Scriptures, that Jehovah will
be gracious to whom he will be gracious, and show mercy on whom he show mercy.

Let me emphasise one last time though: the justice of God is not the mystery. The mystery is human
responsibility. If it be granted that this reconciles with divine sovereignty, there is no
mystery regarding justice.

## Unapproachable Light

The mysteries of our faith are always to be solved by meditating on Christ through faith. How is it
that God the Son remained in the bosom of the Father, remained omnipresent, remained omnipotent,
remained omniscient, yet united himself with a helpless human babe? How was he everywhere and yet
laid in a manger, wrapped in swaddling cloths? How was he omnipotent, indeed, self-sufficient, while
thirsty and hungry? While he feared for his life? How did he remain omniscient while learning,
indeed, without knowing the day of his return?

How did God make the man Christ Jesus truly free, yet it was impossible that he would not fulfil
the promises of God? How was he free yet it was certain that he would never sin? How could he be
tempted if the Scripture could not be broken, and the servant of God would act wisely, with a Spirit
of knowledge and the fear of Jehovah?

How could God choose us in him, before the foundation of the world, reprobating over the rest, and
yet human responsibility remain intact? How can responsibility and necessity be reconciled?

I answer---the same way all these mysteries are reconciled, by the wisdom and power of God, which
transcends our puny minds.

> And now no one looks on the light when it is bright in the skies, when the wind has passed and cleared them.  
> Out of the north comes golden splendour; God is clothed with awesome majesty.  
> The Almighty---we cannot find him; he is great in power; justice and abundant righteousness he will not violate.  
> Therefore men fear him; he does not regard any who are wise in their own conceit."  
> Job 37:21–24
