---
layout: post
title: "Prejudice and Conviction"
date: 2018-07-17 04:00:00 +0200
tags: [truth, opinion]
published: false
---

> The spiritual man judges all things, but is himself to be judged by no one.  
> 1 Corinthians 2:15

Warning: the following article contains many definitions of words which are usually considered
obvious in meaning. These are given for the aid of writer and reader alike. But some may seem
redundant or distracting, so I suggest that readers feel no obligation to dwell on definitions
_until_ they get confused.

That simplicity is the hallmark of clear thinking is a fact well known. It is therefore the duty of
every thinker---by which I mean, every living man---to pursue simplicity in his thinking. Things
that are simple are not always (or even usually) easy, it is their clarity that makes them
desiriable.

By _simple_ we shall mean, without unnecessary detail. This must not be confused with
_simplistic_, which is the omitting of necessary detail.

Whenever clear thought is required (or, whenever light is required) 

_Truth_, the most important word, must always be defined as _what is_. This definition has two
distinct advantages: it is simple and it exposes the error of relativism immediately.

Truth: that which is. I suggest that readers who think there is no such thing as truth first explain
what they mean by the words "there is" (which uses the verb "to be") before they get to "no such
thing as truth".

Opinion: a man's understanding of the truth. This is not an issue of preference but of persuasion.
If _truth_ is what is, then _opinion_ is that which is thought to be.

An opinion is right to the extent that it coincides with truth.

Without passing judgement, we consider three manners of opinion.

1. Conviction: an opinion which a man holds out of fidelity to his principles. The essential idea
   here is that his "conscience is held captive" to these principles, not so much that the
   principles are right or wrong.

2. Prejudice: "a preconceived opinion that is not based on reason". The essential idea here is
  that the man holding the opinion can appeal to nothing higher than the opinion itself as a
  justification for his holding it.

  I emphasise the fact that I have not passed judgement 

