---
layout: post
title: "To you, O men, I call"
date: 2019-07-12 04:00:00 +0200
tags: [Scripture, reading]
published: true
---

It is said in Scripture that the law made nothing perfect (Hebrews 7:19). This means that we may
never think there is salvation in _merely_ explaining to fallen man what God requires of him. This
is the ministry of death and condemnation (2 Corinthians 3:5 ff.). But if the law brings
condemnation, why must it be taught? Indeed, why _should_ it be taught? 

> What then shall we say? That the law is sin? By no means! Yet if it had not been for the law, I
> would not have known sin. For I would not have known what it is to covet if the law had not said,
> "You shall not covet." But sin, seizing an opportunity through the commandment, produced in me all
> kinds of covetousness. For apart from the law, sin lies dead. I was once alive apart from the law,
> but when the commandment came, sin came alive and I died.  
> Romans 7:7–9

Through the law comes knowledge of sin (3:20). The law is our _guardian_ (_pedagogue_ in the
original) to bring us to Christ. Hence it must be taught, and it must be taught before Christ:
indeed, without the teaching of the law there is no teaching of Christ, he being the very
fulfillment thereof.

My aim in this article is to plead for and (with God's help) inspire Christians in their reading of
the Bible. It is my desire that what I write here will be used of God to assist some believers who
are struggling to read the Word [profitably](https://www.gracegems.org/BOOKS/Pink.htm). But if they
are to obtain salvation in this area of their life (like all others) it must come from Christ, and
if they are to turn to Christ, they must first hear from Mount Sinai.

## The Believer's Obligation
The late Mary Oliver began her book _A Poetry Handbook_ with a remarkable set of statements which
warrant lengthy quotation:

> If Romeo and Juliet had made appointments to meet, in the moonlight-swept orchard, in all the
> peril and sweetness of conspiracy, and then more often than not failed to meet---one or the other
> lagging, or afraid, or busy elsewhere---there would have been no romance, no passion, none of the
> drama for which we remember and celebrate them. Writing a poem is not so different---it is a kind
> of possible love affair between something like the heart (that courageous but also shy factory of
> emotion) and the learned skills of the conscious mind. They make appointments with each other, and
> keep them, and something begins to happen. Or, they make appointments with each other but are
> casual and often fail to keep them: count on it, nothing happens.

Thus far the pagan poet. See the seriousness she accords to the cultivation of her art (which
perished with her last breath), see the discipline, see the _romance_. And you, O Christian, can't
find half an hour to spend with the everlasting God? Something is wrong. Tell me, do you find time
to eat? Is it your practice to go days on end without food because of "life pressure"?

> But to the wicked God says: "What right have you to recite my statutes or take my covenant on your
> lips?  
> For you hate discipline, and you cast my words behind you."  
> Psalm 50:16–17

Modern Christianity with its obsessive feelgoodism has failed to make clear to believers what their
duty is with respect to the Word of God. Here it is:

<p align="center" style="font-weight: bold;">
It is your responsibility to live in unhesitating subjection the revealed counsel of God in its
entirety.
</p>

The obedience which God
requires is not outward or formal: it is submission from the heart; hence to the extent that you are
deficient in knowledge, you disqualify yourself from the possibility of obedience. Thus every
word in Scripture, by requiring obedience, _assumes_ antecedent knowledge. To wit, if you do not
know the Word of God, you are not living in obedience to it, and therefore your life is an
abomination to God.

"But God is reasonable," you begin to say, "he cannot surely expect us to know _everything_ in that
monstrously long book!" Let him speak for himself:

> "Everything that I command you, you shall be careful to do. You shall not add to it or take from
> it."  
> Deuteronomy 12:32

And don't worry, dear reader, if you sense the blasphemous spirit of the age rising up within your
bowels, causing you to relax because this text is from the Old Testament. Jesus has something to say
about this too; first, to chastise our abuse of the Law he declares:

> But it is easier for heaven and earth to pass away than for one dot of the Law to become void.  
> Luke 16:17

Moreover, in regard to the matter at hand, in the forgotten clause of the Great Commission he
requires his disciples to "teach them to observe _all_ that I have commanded you" (Matthew 28:20,
emphasis mine). Note also that the promise of his continuing with us is consonant with this
obedience.

